What is thinking procedurally in computer science? | Breaking a problem down into smaller parts which are easier to understand and easier to design
What does breaking a problem into smaller parts make easier? | Understanding the problem and designing the solution
What is problem decomposition? | The process of taking a large, complex problem and breaking it down into smaller subproblems which can be solved more easily
What is the process called where a large problem is broken into smaller subproblems? | Problem decomposition
What are two benefits of separating a problem into sections? | It becomes more feasible to manage and can be divided between a group of people according to their skill sets
What is top-down design? | A method of decomposing a problem by breaking it down into levels, where higher levels provide an overview and lower levels specify detail
What is another name for top-down design? | Stepwise refinement
What is stepwise refinement? | Another name for top-down design - breaking problems down into levels of increasing detail
Why is top-down design the preferred method for approaching very large problems? | Because it breaks problems down into levels, with higher levels providing overview and lower levels specifying detail
What do higher levels in top-down design provide? | An overview of the problem
What do lower levels in top-down design specify? | The detailed components of the problem
What is the aim of using top-down design? | To keep splitting problems into subproblems until each can be represented as a single task and ideally a self-contained module or subroutine
What should each subproblem ideally be represented as after top-down design? | A single task and a self-contained module or subroutine
What advantage does top-down design offer for testing? | Subroutines can be tested separately before being brought together and integrated
What is abstraction in computational thinking? | The act of removing unimportant details from a real problem and focusing on the details that will form part of the solution
What is the purpose of abstraction when solving problems? | To remove unimportant details and focus on details that will form part of the solution (components)
Give an example of abstraction in modelling a garden or football field | Instead of modelling every blade of grass, a green mesh or image is used as the basis for representation
What is an example of abstraction when saving files? | Users do not need to know the underlying complex procedures used to save a file or how the OS represents data using paging and segmentation
What is an example of abstraction when sending an email? | Users do not need to know which protocols are used, how data is formatted, or what protocol handshaking occurs
What is procedural abstraction? | Using a procedure to execute sequences of instructions to achieve some goal
What does thinking procedurally involve? | Procedural abstraction - using procedures to execute sequences of instructions to achieve goals
What is the stage called where details about how each component is implemented are considered? | Identifying the components of a solution
Why must programmers evaluate the component of the problem allocated to them? | To assess how it can best be solved and build up to the solution
What should be identified during the solution stage that can reduce development complexity? | Tasks that could be solved using already existing modules, subroutines or libraries
What is a benefit of identifying reusable components during top-down design? | Reducing the complexity of the development stage
What happens after components of the solution are developed? | They are combined to form a full, working solution
Why is the order in which operations are performed important? | Some programs require certain inputs before processing can occur, and inputs need validation before being passed to next subroutines
What must be done to inputs before they can be passed to the next subroutines? | They must be validated
When might several subroutines be executed simultaneously? | When they do not require data from other subroutines to execute
How should programmers determine subroutine execution order? | By looking at the data and inputs each subroutine requires and their role in solving the problem
What must programmers consider about subroutines that require data from other subroutines? | They will be unable to execute simultaneously and their execution order must be determined
Why should programs ensure operations are not carried out in an illogical order? | To prevent errors and ensure the program works as intended
What is decomposition? | The act of taking a problem and breaking it down into smaller, more understandable and more easily solved sub-problems
What is one method of decomposing a problem? | Top-down design
What does top-down design involve breaking down? | A problem into major tasks, then breaking those major tasks into smaller sub-tasks
When should sub-tasks stop being broken down in top-down design? | When each can be solved using a single subroutine or module
What three characteristics should each sub-task have after decomposition? | Unable to be broken down further, easily solved, and clear
What is the goal of top-down design? | To structure a program into small manageable tasks
Why is it important that everyone understands the problem in top-down design? | Because tasks may be delegated to other developers and need to be coordinated as a team
What advantage does decomposition provide for testing? | Each subroutine is much simpler to test and maintain, especially using unit testing
What is unit testing? | A testing method where each subroutine is tested individually
Why is it easier to find errors when using decomposition? | Because each subroutine is self-contained and well documented
What is the advantage of having self-contained subroutines? | It is easier to find errors in code and fix problems as they arise
What is convenient about subroutines created through decomposition? | They can be reused as necessary rather than rewriting code
What is a hierarchy chart? | A diagram used to show problem decomposition, depicting how modules and subroutines relate to each other as a tree structure
What does a hierarchy chart show? | How modules and subroutines relate to each other
What structure is a hierarchy chart depicted as? | A tree structure
How can hierarchy charts be created? | On paper, digitally, or programmatically by software
What happens to each problem in a hierarchy chart? | It is divided into multiple subproblems, which are divided into further subproblems until they cannot be divided any further
Why are diagrams preferred over tables and lists for larger problems? | Because tables and lists can quickly become cumbersome for larger problems
What is a function in programming? | A subroutine that returns a value
What is a procedure in programming (strict definition)? | A subroutine that does not return a value
In the context of thinking procedurally, what can a procedure be viewed as? | A unit of computation that performs a single task
What technical details should be considered when identifying solution components? | Input/output data types, data structures required, libraries needed, output format, data transformations, and algorithm efficiency
What types of input/output data types might need to be considered? | Integer, real/float, string, boolean, etc.
What data structures might be required when solving a problem? | Array, list, dictionary, linked list, hash table
Why might existing libraries be required when solving a problem? | To provide ready-made functionality such as statistics or math modules
What should be considered regarding algorithm efficiency? | Whether the algorithm needs to meet a specific time complexity such as O(n) or less
What can more complex problems require? | Larger programs consisting of many subroutines that call each other or imported library subroutines
Why is using a drop-down field better than a text entry field for location input? | It reduces the likelihood of erroneous data being entered, such as invalid locations
What type of interface element helps reduce erroneous data entry? | Drop-down fields in forms
