What is the Accumulator (ACC)? | A special register to temporarily store the results of operations performed by the ALU.
Which register temporarily stores the results of ALU operations? | The Accumulator (ACC)
What does the Address Bus carry? | The memory location address of the register the data is being carried to or from.
What is the Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU)? | A part of the CPU that performs arithmetic calculations and logical operations on data for computer programs.
Which CPU component performs arithmetic calculations and logical operations? | The Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU)
What are buses in a computer? | A physical set of parallel wires connecting and carrying groups of bits between several components of a computer.
What is cache? | A small and fast but expensive memory in the CPU used to store instructions and data that are accessed regularly.
What is clock speed? | The frequency at which the internal clock generates signals switching between 0 and 1, controlling how often instructions are executed and data is fetched.
What does clock speed control? | How often instructions are executed and data is fetched.
What is Contemporary Processor Architecture? | A modern computer architecture combining elements of both Von Neumann and Harvard architectures.
What does the Control Bus do? | A bi-directional bus carrying control signals from the CU to synchronise access and use of data.
What is the Control Unit? | A part of the CPU that controls and manages the execution of instructions, sends control signals to coordinate execution, and controls Fetch-Decode-Execute cycles and buses.
Which CPU component manages the execution of instructions and controls FDE cycles? | The Control Unit
What is the Current Instruction Register (CIR)? | A special register that stores the current instruction being executed and decoded, with instructions divided into operand and opcode.
What are the two parts an instruction is divided into in the CIR? | Operand and opcode
What does the Data Bus do? | A bi-directional bus for carrying data and instructions between the processor and memory.
Is the Data Bus uni-directional or bi-directional? | Bi-directional
What are the three stages of the Fetch-Decode-Execute Cycle? | Fetch (supplying address and retrieving instruction from memory), Decode (interpreting instruction and retrieving required data), Execute (CPU carries out required actions).
What happens during the Fetch stage of the FDE cycle? | Supplying the address and retrieving the instruction from memory.
What happens during the Decode stage of the FDE cycle? | Interpreting the instruction and reading/retrieving the required data from their addresses.
What happens during the Execute stage of the FDE cycle? | The CPU carries out the required actions.
What is Harvard Architecture? | A computer architecture that stores data and instructions in separate memories to allow the next instruction to be read while data is currently being read or written.
What advantage does Harvard Architecture provide? | It allows the next instruction to be read while data is currently being read or written.
What is the Memory Address Register (MAR)? | A special register that stores the memory address of the next instruction to load or data to use.
Which register stores the memory address of the next instruction to load? | The Memory Address Register (MAR)
What is the Memory Data Register (MDR)? | A special register that temporarily stores data to be read from or written to the computer's memory.
Which register temporarily stores data being read from or written to memory? | The Memory Data Register (MDR)
What is a core in a processor? | A processing unit that handles instructions with its own fetch-execute-decode cycles.
What are multi-core processors? | Processors that have multiple cores that can run simultaneously.
What is pipelining? | The simultaneous decoding of several instructions by decoding the next instruction and fetching the one after while the current one is being decoded.
What is the Program Counter (PC)? | A special purpose register that stores the address of the next instruction to execute.
Which register stores the address of the next instruction to execute? | The Program Counter (PC)
What are registers? | Special memory cells that can be accessed quickly, temporarily storing data and control information.
What is Von Neumann Architecture? | A computer architecture where a single control unit manages program control via a linear sequence of fetch-execute-decode cycles.
What is CISC (Complex Instruction Set Computer)? | A more complicated and expensive processor design that can execute a series of tasks in a single complex instruction built into the hardware.
What is a disadvantage of CISC regarding pipelining? | Pipelining is not possible with CISC.
What is an advantage of CISC regarding RAM usage? | The variety of instructions means less RAM is used.
What is a GPU (Graphic Processing Unit)? | A specialised processing unit with a huge number of small cores that allow efficient parallel computation for tasks such as computer graphics, machine learning, and data mining.
What tasks are GPUs well-suited for? | Computer graphics, machine learning, and data mining.
What are Multicore Systems? | Several CPU cores incorporated into a single processor chip to help distribute workload.
What is a Parallel Processing System? | Splitting a job into several subtasks which are simultaneously carried out by each core in the system.
What is RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Computer)? | A simpler processor design that can only execute a single simple instruction each clock cycle, using more RAM but allowing pipelining.
What is an advantage of RISC over CISC? | RISC allows pipelining.
What is a disadvantage of RISC compared to CISC? | RISC uses more RAM.
What is Flash Storage? | A solid state technology that stores data on a collection of memory chips with no moving parts, as data is accessed by software.
Why does flash storage have no moving parts? | Because data is accessed by software rather than mechanical components.
What are Input Devices? | Peripheral devices that allow the user to communicate and pass readable data into a computer, decode it and send it to the CPU.
What is Magnetic Storage? | Storage that relies on the polarisation of magnetic particles to store bits on a magnetic material which is typically moved mechanically.
What are the advantages of magnetic storage? | High capacity and low cost.
What is Optical Storage? | Storage where data is stored in the reflectivity (pits and lands) of a surface, and is read and written to by a laser.
What are pits and lands in optical storage? | Features on the surface that represent data through different reflectivity levels.
What are Output Devices? | Peripheral devices that convert signals from a computer into a human-readable form.
What is RAM (Random Access Memory)? | Memory used to store programs and data in use by the computer, with quick access times but all data is lost when the computer is turned off (volatile memory).
Is RAM volatile or non-volatile? | Volatile (data is lost when power is off)
What is ROM (Read-Only Memory)? | Memory used to store information permanently required to boot up and run the computer, cannot be written to and is non-volatile.
Is ROM volatile or non-volatile? | Non-volatile
What is the purpose of ROM? | To store information permanently required to boot up and run the computer.
What is a Storage Device? | Any medium on which data can be stored even when powered off.
What is Virtual Storage? | Using the hard disk as though it were an extension of memory to free up more RAM for current programs.
What is the purpose of virtual storage? | To free up more RAM for current programs by using the hard disk as an extension of memory.
