What is abstraction? | Simplifying a problem by only considering the necessary details required to obtain a solution, leaving a representation without unnecessary details
What computational thinking technique involves simplifying a problem by removing unnecessary details? | Abstraction
What is data abstraction? | The storage and representation of data in a computer system along with its logical description and interaction with operators (e.g. stacks, queues, integers)
Give three examples of data abstraction | Stacks, queues, integers
What is graph theory? | A branch of mathematics used to abstractly represent problems using a collection of nodes connected by edges
What mathematical approach represents problems using nodes connected by edges? | Graph theory
What is caching? | The temporary storage of data by the system in cache or memory for faster retrieval if needed again in future
Why is caching used? | For faster retrieval of data if it is needed again in future
What are inputs in computational thinking? | Any information relevant to the problem that is required by the system for processing according to an algorithm
What are outputs in computational thinking? | The result returned by a system for a given input after running the entire process or part of a process
What are preconditions? | A prerequisite or state of a system and its surroundings required to run a use case and return a valid solution
What must be established before a use case can run and return a valid solution? | Preconditions
What are reusable program components? | Components that have already been written, debugged and tested that can be transplanted into new systems to save development time
What is the benefit of using reusable program components? | Saves development time in project completion
What is procedural abstraction? | Achieving a task by relying on a procedure of sequential steps
What are components of a problem? | The smaller, simpler series of tasks and sub-procedures a problem can be broken down into to be completed modularly
What is the process of breaking a problem into smaller, simpler tasks called? | Decomposition into components of a problem
What is a flowchart? | A diagrammatic representation of the flow of a program that includes all the points where a decision needs to be taken to obtain a solution
What are logical conditions? | Conditions which may depend on one or more variables used to determine the next step whenever a system has to make a decision
How are logical conditions typically implemented? | Using control structures such as sequences, selections and iterations
What three control structures are used to implement logical conditions? | Sequences, selections and iterations
What is concurrent processing? | Processing where the system appears to perform multiple tasks simultaneously
What type of processing appears to perform multiple tasks simultaneously? | Concurrent processing
