What are programming paradigms? | Different approaches to using a programming language to solve a problem
Different approaches to using a programming language to solve a problem are called what? | Programming paradigms
What are the two broad categories of programming paradigms? | Imperative and declarative
Which paradigms fall under the imperative category? | Procedural and object-oriented
Which paradigms fall under the declarative category? | Logic and functional
What determines which programming paradigm should be used? | The type of problem that needs solving
What is the key characteristic of imperative programming paradigms? | They use code that clearly specifies the actions to be performed
What type of paradigm uses code that clearly specifies the actions to be performed? | Imperative programming
What is procedural programming? | A type of imperative programming which uses a sequence of instructions that may be contained within procedures, carried out step-by-step
Why is procedural programming one of the most widely-used paradigms? | It can be applied to a wide range of problems and is relatively easy to write and interpret
Name three examples of procedural programming languages. | Pascal, Python, Logo
What is object-oriented programming (OOP)? | A paradigm built on entities called objects formed from classes which have certain attributes and methods
What does OOP focus on? | Making programs that are reusable and easy to update and maintain
Name three examples of object-oriented programming languages. | Python, Delphi, Java
What is declarative programming? | A paradigm that focuses on stating the desired result rather than the exact series of instructions needed to get the result
In declarative programming, what determines how to obtain the result? | The programming language itself determines how best to obtain the result
What are details about how results are obtained in declarative programming? | Abstracted from the user
Where is declarative programming commonly used? | Expert systems and artificial intelligence
What is functional programming? | A paradigm that uses the concept of reusing a set of functions which form the core of the program
What are programs in functional programming made up of? | Lines of code consisting of function calls, often combined within each other
What is functional programming closely linked to? | Mathematics
Name three examples of functional programming languages. | Haskell, C#, Java
What is logic programming? | A declarative paradigm that uses code defining a set of facts and rules based on the problem, with queries used to find answers
What are used to find answers to problems in logic programming? | Queries
Name an example of a logic programming language. | Prolog
What data types do procedural languages use? | Traditional data types such as integers and strings which are built into the language
What data structures do procedural languages provide? | Dictionaries and arrays
What is structured programming? | A popular subsection of procedural programming in which the control flow is given by four main programming structures
What are the four main programming structures in structured programming? | Sequence, selection, iteration, and recursion
What is sequence in structured programming? | Code is executed line-by-line, from top to bottom
What is selection in structured programming? | A certain block of code is run if a specific condition is met, using IF statements
What is iteration in structured programming? | A block of code is executed a certain number of times or while a condition is met, using FOR, WHILE or REPEAT UNTIL loops
What is recursion in structured programming? | Functions expressed in terms of themselves, calling themselves until a base case is met
What is a base case in recursion? | A condition that does not call the function, stopping the recursion
What types of problems is procedural programming suited to? | Problems that can easily be expressed as a series of instructions using sequence, selection, iteration, and recursion
What is assembly language? | The next level up from machine code, part of a family of low-level languages
How is assembly language converted to machine code? | Using an assembler
What does assembly language use instead of binary? | Mnemonics
What is a mnemonic in assembly language? | An abbreviation for a machine code instruction
Why is assembly language easier to use than direct machine code? | Because it uses mnemonics rather than binary
Why are assembly language commands processor-specific? | Because it directly interacts with the CPU's special purpose registers
What does assembly language allow that makes it useful in embedded systems? | Direct interaction with hardware
How does one line of assembly language typically relate to machine code? | Each instruction in assembly language is equivalent to almost one line of machine code
What does the ADD mnemonic do in LMC? | Adds the value at the given memory address to the value in the Accumulator
What does the SUB mnemonic do in LMC? | Subtracts the value at the given memory address from the value in the Accumulator
What does the STA (Store) mnemonic do in LMC? | Stores the value in the Accumulator at the given memory address
What does the LDA (Load) mnemonic do in LMC? | Loads the value at the given memory address into the Accumulator
What does the INP mnemonic do in LMC? | Allows the user to input a value which will be held in the Accumulator
What does the OUT mnemonic do in LMC? | Prints the value currently held in the Accumulator
What does the HLT mnemonic do in LMC? | Stops the program at that line, preventing the rest of the code from executing
What does the DAT mnemonic do in LMC? | Creates a flag with a label at which data is stored
What does the BRZ mnemonic do in LMC? | Branches to a given address if the value in the Accumulator is zero (conditional branch)
What does the BRP mnemonic do in LMC? | Branches to a given address if the value in the Accumulator is positive (conditional branch)
What does the BRA mnemonic do in LMC? | Branches to a given address no matter the value in the Accumulator (unconditional branch)
What is LMC? | Little Man Computer - a hypothetical computer model used for understanding fundamental operations and mechanics of a computer
What are the two parts of a machine code instruction? | Opcode and operand
What does the opcode specify? | The instruction to be performed
What does the operand hold? | A value related to the data on which the instruction is to be performed
Why do addressing modes allow for a greater number of memory locations? | Because the size of the operand would otherwise constrain the number of addresses that could be accessed
What specifies how the operand should be interpreted? | The addressing mode
Where is the addressing mode located within an instruction? | It is part of the opcode
What are the four addressing modes you need to know? | Immediate, Direct, Indirect, and Indexed
What is immediate addressing? | The operand is the actual value upon which the instruction is to be performed, represented in binary
What is direct addressing? | The operand gives the address which holds the value upon which the instruction is to be performed
Which addressing mode is used in LMC? | Direct addressing
What is indirect addressing? | The operand gives the address of a register which holds another address, where the data is located
What is indexed addressing? | An index register stores a value, and the address of the operand is determined by adding the operand to the index register
Why is indexed addressing necessary? | To add an offset in order to access data stored contiguously in memory such as in arrays
What is a class in OOP? | A template for an object that defines the state and behaviour of an object
A template for an object that defines state and behaviour is called what? | A class
What gives an object's state in OOP? | Attributes which give an object's properties
What defines an object's behaviour in OOP? | Methods associated with a class, which describe the actions it can perform
What is instantiation in OOP? | The process of creating objects from classes
What is an object in OOP? | A particular instance of a class
Can a class be used to create multiple objects? | Yes, with the same set of attributes and methods
What is a setter in OOP? | A method that sets the value of a particular attribute
What is a getter in OOP? | A method that retrieves the value of a given attribute
Why are getters and setters used in OOP? | To make sure attributes cannot be directly accessed and edited by users
What is encapsulation in OOP? | A property where attributes are declared as private so can only be altered by public methods
What is the purpose of encapsulation? | To protect attributes from being directly accessed, making code more reliable
What is a constructor method in OOP? | A method (called 'new') that allows a new object to be created
What is inheritance in OOP? | When a class can inherit from another class, possessing all methods and attributes of the parent class
What is a subclass (derived class) in OOP? | A class that inherits from another class and possesses all methods and attributes of the superclass
What is a superclass (parent class) in OOP? | A class from which other classes inherit methods and attributes
Can a subclass have its own additional properties beyond inherited ones? | Yes, it can have its own additional properties
How is inheritance expressed in pseudocode? | class SubclassName inherits SuperclassName
What is polymorphism in OOP? | A property that means objects can behave differently depending on their class
What can polymorphism result in? | The same method producing different outputs depending on the object involved
What are the two categories of polymorphism? | Overriding and overloading
What is overriding in polymorphism? | Redefining a method within a subclass and altering the code so that it functions differently and produces a different output
What is overloading in polymorphism? | Passing in different parameters into a method
What OOP properties allow for high reusability? | Inheritance and polymorphism
What is an advantage of OOP regarding class usage? | Classes can be used across multiple projects
Why does encapsulation make code more reliable in OOP? | By protecting attributes from being directly accessed; code for different classes can be produced independently
What does OOP require before coding begins? | Advance planning to determine how the problem will be broken down into classes and how these will link
What does thorough design in OOP produce? | A higher-quality piece of software with fewer vulnerabilities
Why is OOP easy to maintain and update? | Because of the modular structure used
What level of abstraction does OOP provide? | A high level - programmers don't need to know details about how code is implemented
How can tested classes be reused in OOP? | As a black box, which saves time and effort
What is a disadvantage of OOP for programmers used to other paradigms? | It requires an alternative style of thinking which can be difficult to pick up
When might OOP result in a longer, more inefficient program? | Where few components are reused
For what size of problems is OOP generally unsuitable? | Smaller problems
What are variables in procedural programming? | Named storage locations that hold data values which can change during program execution
What are constants in procedural programming? | Named storage locations that hold values which remain unchanged throughout program execution
What makes assembly language lack portability? | It is hardware-specific, written for a particular CPU architecture
Why is assembly language difficult to maintain? | It is tedious and error-prone due to manual memory management
What advantage does assembly language have for performance? | It allows optimised performance due to low-level operations and direct control over hardware
What is a strength of procedural programming regarding control flow? | It provides a clear flow of control (top to bottom)
What is a weakness of procedural programming for large programs? | It can become unwieldy and difficult to manage as the system grows
Why might procedural programming lead to code redundancy? | Due to lack of modularity
What is a weakness of OOP regarding complexity? | It can lead to unnecessary complexity and misuse can create overly complex inheritance hierarchies
What causes inefficiency in OOP? | Overhead such as memory requirements for objects
