What is abstraction? | The process of removing unnecessary details of a problem to focus on the important features to implement in a solution
What do we call the process of removing unnecessary details to focus on important features? | Abstraction
What is representational abstraction? | Analysing what is relevant to a given scenario and simplifying a problem based on this information
What type of abstraction involves analysing relevance and simplifying a problem accordingly? | Representational abstraction
What is abstraction by generalisation? | Grouping together similarities within a problem to identify what kind of problem it is, allowing problems to be categorised as a particular type
What type of abstraction involves grouping similarities to categorise problems? | Abstraction by generalisation
What is the benefit of abstraction by generalisation? | It allows a common solution to be used to solve problems of the same type
What is data abstraction? | A subcategory of abstraction where details about how data is being stored are hidden
What type of abstraction hides details about how data is stored? | Data abstraction
What are abstract data structures? | Data structures like stacks and queues that programmers can use without concerning themselves with how they are implemented
Give two examples of abstract data structures | Stacks and queues
What is procedural abstraction? | Modelling what a subroutine does without considering how it is done
What type of abstraction models what a subroutine does without considering how? | Procedural abstraction
What can a procedure be reused as once it has been coded? | A black-box
What do large, complex problems make use of? | Multiple levels of abstraction, where each level performs a different role
What are the highest levels of abstraction responsible for? | Providing an interface for the user to interact with hardware
What are the lowest levels of abstraction responsible for? | Actually performing tasks through the execution of machine code
What does abstraction allow non-experts to do? | Make use of a range of systems or models by hiding information that is too complex or irrelevant
How does abstraction benefit software development efficiency? | Programmers can focus on elements that need to be built rather than worrying about unnecessary details, reducing project time
What does removing wasteful details early in development prevent? | The program from getting unnecessarily large
What is a low-level language? | A programming language like assembly code or machine code that directly interacts with computer systems
Give two examples of low-level languages | Assembly code and machine code
What is the disadvantage of low-level languages? | They are more difficult to write
What knowledge is required to program in machine code? | Understanding of the functions specific binary codes perform
What knowledge is required to program in assembly language? | The mnemonics associated with the instruction set specific to the processor
What do high-level languages provide an abstraction for? | The machine code that is executed when a program is run
Why is developing programs easier in high-level languages? | Syntax parallels natural language and is considerably easier to learn and use
What has the use of high-level languages enabled? | Made coding accessible to non-specialists
What is the TCP/IP model? | An abstraction for how networks function, separated into four layers of abstraction
What are the four layers of the TCP/IP model? | Application, transport, internet, and link
Why is the TCP/IP model separated into layers? | Each layer deals with a different part of the communication process, making them simpler to understand
How does each layer in the TCP/IP model relate to other layers? | Each layer does not need to know how other layers work
How is outgoing communication visualised in the TCP/IP model? | Going down the layers
How is incoming communication visualised in the TCP/IP model? | Going up the layers
Why must standards be agreed in advance for layered models? | To ensure compatibility between the layers
What does the TCP/IP model use to allow each layer to be dealt with individually? | A set of protocols
What is the relationship between abstraction and reality? | Abstraction is a simplified representation of reality
How may real-world entities be represented computationally? | Using computational structures such as tables and databases
How are real-world values often stored in programs? | As variables
What do objects represent in object-oriented programming? | An abstraction for real-world entities
In OOP, what does abstraction consider about entities? | The functionality, interface and properties of entities
What are attributes in OOP an abstraction for? | The characteristics of an object
What are methods in OOP an abstraction for? | The actions a real-world object is able to perform
When devising an abstract model, what must you consider about the problem? | What is the problem that needs to be solved? Can it be solved computationally? What are the key features?
When devising an abstract model, what must you consider about model usage? | What format does the model need? Consider convenience, affordability and ease of access
When devising an abstract model, what must you consider about the audience? | How many people will use it? What level of expertise do they have?
When devising an abstract model, what should be removed? | Sections not relevant to the problem and details that will confuse the audience
What is an example of abstraction in transport maps? | The London Underground map shows stops and connections without geographical layout
Why is the London Underground map an example of abstraction? | Travellers only need to know that stop A connects to stop B, not the geographical route
How does the level of abstraction relate to reality? | The closer the implementation is to reality, the less abstract the solution becomes
What is Pong an example of in terms of abstraction? | A highly abstracted game of tennis or badminton
Why is Pong considered highly abstracted? | The ball momentum is constant with no extraneous factors like friction or gravity
What real-world elements can be abstracted when creating a city map for navigation? | Greenspace and buildings, leaving only roads and junctions
How can road junctions be represented in an abstracted map? | As graph nodes
How can roads be represented in an abstracted map? | As edges or arcs between junction nodes
How can one-way restrictions (like no left turnings) be represented? | Using directed edges or arcs
How can distance between junctions be represented in an abstracted map? | As weights on each arc or edge
What algorithms can be applied to an abstracted map graph? | Dijkstra's shortest path or A* search
What additional factors can navigation apps like Google Maps factor into route calculations? | Traffic, roadworks and weather conditions
What is machine code also known as? | Binary or a first generation language
Why is programming in machine code difficult? | It is time consuming, tedious and error prone even for simple programs
What is assembly language classified as? | A second generation language
What do assembly language mnemonics represent? | Groups of binary digits (e.g., 1011 might represent ADD)
What are the advantages of assembly language over machine code? | Easier, quicker and less error prone to create programs
What is a disadvantage of assembly language? | Each processor has its own instruction set, so programs must be rewritten for different processors
What are third generation languages? | High-level languages such as BASIC, FORTRAN, Python, Java, and C
What is the main advantage of third generation languages? | They abstract long, complicated sequences of instructions into shorter instructions
What do high-level languages allow programmers to ignore? | How data is stored in memory and the specifics of how instructions are carried out
What analogy describes programming language abstraction? | A car driver doesn't need to know how the engine works to drive; similarly, programmers don't need to know underlying complexity
What is data abstraction in programming? | Hiding how primitive data types like integers, strings or booleans are stored and represented
What do higher level languages allow programmers to create? | Abstracted data types to represent logical structures like queues
What is a queue in terms of data structure? | A first-in, first-out structure where items are added to the back and removed from the front
What are queues actually implemented as at a lower level? | Modified arrays
What is the hierarchy of data abstraction from queue to lowest level? | Queues are modified arrays, which are collections of variables, which are bytes, which are bits, which are flip-flops
What does a programmer need to know about a queue? | Only that they can add to and remove data from it, not the underlying implementation
What does abstraction allow in terms of data structures? | Creating powerful analogous structures that closely resemble and operate similarly to real life
What is the overall purpose of abstraction? | Separating what a program does from the implementation or how it does it
What questions must be answered to create abstract models? | What is the problem? Can it be broken into milestones? What elements impact the solution?
How can you test if an element should be included in an abstraction? | Ask if removing it would impact the solution in any way
