What is the purpose of thinking ahead in software design? | To consider problems or difficulties that may arise when software is used, allowing developers to design strategies to make programs easy and intuitive to use
What are the two core components that all computational problems consist of? | Inputs which are processed to produce outputs
What is an input in computational terms? | Any data that is required to solve a problem, entered into the system by the user
What is an output in computational terms? | The results that are passed back once the inputs have been processed and the problem solved
Data required to solve a problem, entered by the user | Input
Results passed back after inputs have been processed | Output
Besides the data itself, what two factors about input must designers consider? | The order in which data is input and the method of input
What must designers decide on when presenting the output of a solution? | A suitable data type, structure and method to present the solution
What is typically the first step when designing a solution? | Considering what outputs are required based on the user's requirements
After identifying required outputs, what is the next step in design? | Identify the inputs required and how these need to be processed to achieve the outputs
Can output data only be displayed on a screen or monitor? | No, output data can include information in visual or audio format, requiring output devices such as printers or speakers
What are preconditions? | Requirements which must be met before a program can be executed
Requirements that must be met before a program can execute | Preconditions
What happens if preconditions are not met? | The program will fail to execute or return an invalid answer
What does specifying preconditions allow a subroutine to do? | Safely expect the arguments passed to it to meet certain criteria as defined by the preconditions
Where can preconditions be specified? | Tested for within the code, or included in the documentation accompanying a subroutine, library or program
Give an example of a precondition for a pop() function on a stack | The stack must not be empty (top pointer must be greater than 0)
Why is it important to test for preconditions in a pop() function? | Popping from an empty stack would produce an error that would cause the program to crash
What is an example of a function where preconditions are typically specified in documentation rather than code? | The factorial function, which can only be called upon positive numbers (non-negative numbers)
What are the benefits of including preconditions in documentation rather than code? | Reduces the length and complexity of the program, saves time needed to debug and maintain a longer program
What is the purpose of preconditions? | To ensure necessary checks are carried out before execution of a subroutine, either by the user or as part of the subroutine
How do preconditions relate to reusability? | By explicitly ensuring conditions are met, subroutines are made more reusable
What are arguments in programming? | The values passed into the parameters in a subroutine
The values passed into parameters in a subroutine | Arguments
What is caching? | The process of storing instructions or values in cache memory after they have been used, as they may be used again
The process of storing instructions or values in cache memory for potential reuse | Caching
What is the main benefit of caching? | Saves time which would have been needed to store and retrieve instructions from secondary storage again
Give a common example of caching in everyday computing | Web page caching - frequently accessed web pages are cached so content can be loaded without delay on next access
What additional benefit does web caching provide for networks? | Images and text do not have to be downloaded again multiple times, freeing up bandwidth for other tasks
What is prefetching? | A more advanced variation of caching where algorithms predict which instructions are likely to soon be fetched, then load and store them in cache before they are needed
How does prefetching differ from standard caching? | Prefetching loads instructions into cache before they are fetched, while standard caching stores them after use
What is the main limitation of prefetching algorithms? | They can only provide an informed prediction about which instructions will be used - there is no guarantee this will be correct
What factor limits how much data can be stored in cache? | Cache size - larger caches take longer to search, so cache size limits how much data can be stored
What determines the effectiveness of caching? | How well a caching algorithm is able to manage the cache
Is caching easy to implement effectively? | No, it can be difficult to implement but can significantly improve performance if implemented effectively
What are reusable program components? | Commonly used functions packaged into libraries for reuse, including implementations of abstract data structures, classes and subroutines
Give examples of reusable program components | Implementations of abstract data structures (queues, stacks), classes, and subroutines
What is decomposition in software design? | Breaking down a problem into smaller, simpler tasks
Breaking down a problem into smaller, simpler tasks | Decomposition
How does decomposition relate to thinking ahead? | It allows developers to think ahead about how each task can be solved and identify where existing program components can be reused
Why are reusable components more reliable than newly-coded components? | They have already been tested and any bugs dealt with
What resources does using reusable components save? | Time, money and resources
How can subroutines be reused to produce different outputs? | By being reused with different arguments
What is a potential drawback of using third-party reusable components? | Compatibility issues with the rest of the software may make integration difficult
What might be required if third-party components have compatibility issues? | The components may need to be modified to work with existing software
When might modifying third-party components be worse than creating new ones? | When modification is more costly and time-consuming than developing them in-house
What long-term benefit comes from producing well-tested, reusable components? | They can be reused in future projects, saving development costs
When designing an algorithm, what must be explicitly defined about inputs and outputs? | Their type, size and format
What happens if inputs and outputs are not defined explicitly? | Creating an algorithm becomes much more difficult and can cause errors and problems when unexpected events occur
What is a precondition for the binary search algorithm? | The list must be ordered/sorted
What happens if an unordered list is passed to binary search? | It will fail to execute correctly
Why might a parameter list being empty cause problems? | It could cause index out of bounds errors
Why might data needing to be the same data type be a precondition? | Otherwise invalid results may be returned or invalid comparisons made
Why might a bubble sort algorithm have a size limit precondition? | Being O(n²), a large input list could cause the program to take a very long time to complete
What is cache in terms of hardware? | Tiny storage on a processor used to temporarily store frequently used data and instructions while a program is running
What is web caching? | Storing HTML pages and images most recently looked at, allowing for faster access and saving bandwidth
What are libraries in programming? | Packages containing commonly used subroutines bundled together
Give examples of common subroutines found in libraries | Printing, casting, finding maximum/minimum values, generating random numbers
What types of bespoke subroutines might developers create for their own libraries? | Subroutines to calculate length or difference in linked lists, implementations of data structures (stacks, queues), standard algorithms (quick sort, merge sort)
What benefit comes from using thoroughly tested and documented subroutines? | Saves time when working on new projects
What input devices might an ATM system require? | Touch screen, magnetic stripe card reader, keypad
What output devices might an ATM system require? | Monitor, cash dispenser, printer, speakers
