What is the function of the processor? | The processor executes instructions which allows programs to run.
What does the ALU do? | Completes all arithmetical operations (addition, subtraction) and logical operations (AND, OR, NOT, XOR).
What are the five main jobs of the Control Unit? | 1) Controlling and coordinating CPU activities 2) Managing data flow between CPU and devices 3) Accepting next instruction 4) Decoding instructions 5) Storing resulting data back in memory.
What are registers? | Small memory cells that operate at very high speed, used to temporarily store data.
What does the Program Counter (PC) hold? | The address of the next instruction to be executed.
What does the Accumulator (ACC) store? | The results from calculations.
What does the Memory Address Register (MAR) hold? | The address of a location that is to be read from or written to.
What does the Memory Data Register (MDR) temporarily store? | Data that has been read or data that needs to be written.
What does the Current Instruction Register (CIR) hold? | The current instruction being executed, divided into operand and opcode.
What is a bus? | A set of parallel wires which connect two or more components inside the CPU.
What are the three buses in the CPU called collectively? | The system bus.
What does bus width determine? | The number of bits that can be transferred simultaneously at any given time.
What is the Data Bus used for? | Transporting data and instructions between components (bi-directional).
What is the Address Bus used for? | Transmitting memory addresses specifying where data is to be sent or retrieved from.
What is the Control Bus used for? | Transmitting control signals between internal and external components (bi-directional).
Name three control signals carried by the Control Bus. | 1) Bus request 2) Bus grant 3) Memory write/read 4) Interrupt request 5) Clock (any three).
What is an opcode? | The part of an instruction that specifies the type of instruction to be executed.
What is an operand? | The part of an instruction that contains the data or address of data upon which the operation is to be performed.
What is pipelining? | Completing fetch, decode, and execute cycles of three separate instructions simultaneously to reduce CPU idle time.
What are the two types of pipelining? | Instruction pipelining and arithmetic pipelining.
List the four steps of the Fetch phase. | 1) Address from PC copied to MAR 2) Instruction at that address copied to MDR 3) PC contents increased by 1 4) MDR value copied to CIR.
What happens in the Decode phase? | The contents of CIR are split into operand and opcode.
What happens in the Execute phase? | The decoded instruction is executed.
What is clock speed? | The time taken for one clock cycle to complete.
What is a core? | An independent processor that is able to run its own fetch-execute cycle.
Why doesn't dual-core always double performance? | Not all programs are designed to utilise multiple cores efficiently.
What is cache memory? | The CPU's onboard memory where instructions from main memory are copied for faster access.
What are the characteristics of Level 1 Cache? | Very fast memory cells with small capacity (2-64KB).
What are the characteristics of Level 2 Cache? | Relatively fast memory with medium capacity (256KB-2MB).
What are the characteristics of Level 3 Cache? | Much larger and slower memory cell.
What is Von Neumann architecture? | Architecture using shared memory and shared data bus for both data and instructions.
What is Harvard architecture? | Architecture with physically separate memories for instructions and data.
Name one advantage of Von Neumann architecture. | Cheaper to develop as control unit is easier to design, or programs can be optimised in size.
Name one advantage of Harvard architecture. | Quicker execution as data and instructions can be fetched in parallel, or memories can be different sizes.
What architecture do contemporary processors use? | A combination of Harvard and Von Neumann - Von Neumann for main memory, Harvard for dividing cache into instruction and data cache.
What three factors affect CPU performance? | Clock speed, number of cores, and amount/type of cache memory.
How does wider address bus affect memory? | It increases the number of addressable memory locations.
What does bi-directional mean for a bus? | Bits can be carried in both directions.
What is assembly language? | A simplified way of representing machine code using mnemonics (e.g., ADD for addition).
What is the stored program concept? | The basis of Von Neumann architecture where programs are stored in memory.
