What is BIOS and what does it do? | Basic Input Output System - a program that initialises/tests system hardware, then loads the OS from hard disk into RAM when the computer starts.
What are device drivers? | Programs supplied with peripherals that allow the OS to control and communicate with the device.
What are distributed operating systems? | OS spread over multiple computer servers on a network, acting as a single system to parallel process jobs.
What are embedded operating systems? | Specialised OS with limited resources and functionality, built in to control a single machine.
How does First Come First Served scheduling work? | Processes are dealt with in the order they arrive (using a queue).
What is intermediate code? | Code partly translated between high-level and machine language, produced by a compiler.
What are interrupts? | Signals from hardware, software or the clock to alert the CPU. If higher priority than current task, the current routine pauses and resumes after the interrupt is executed.
What happens during an Interrupt Service Routine (ISR)? | If interrupt has higher priority, register contents are transferred onto the system stack at the end of current FDE cycle, then the interrupt is handled.
What is memory management? | The efficient organisation and allocation of main memory to programs in use.
How do multi-level feedback queues work? | A scheduling algorithm using multiple queues, each with different priority. Jobs can be moved between queues.
What are multi-tasking operating systems? | OS capable of running multiple tasks simultaneously.
What are multi-user operating systems? | OS with one mainframe computer and multiple terminals allowing multiple users to access resources. Each user gets a time slice of the mainframe processor.
What is an operating system? | A set of programs managing computer operation, loaded into RAM when the computer turns on. It bridges the user to the hardware.
What is paging? | Partitioning memory into fixed-sized physical divisions called pages. Processes are assigned an appropriate number of pages.
What are real-time operating systems? | OS where data is processed as it arrives, with responses generated within a guaranteed timeframe.
How does round-robin scheduling work? | Each process gets an equal time slice on a first-in-first-out basis. Unfinished processes join the end of the queue.
What is scheduling in an OS? | Allocating processor time to each application to ensure efficient use of processor time when multitasking.
What is segmentation? | Partitioning memory into variable-sized logical divisions called segments. Large programs can be executed by consecutively running their segments.
How does shortest job first scheduling work? | Picks the process with shortest estimated running time and runs it until it finishes.
How does shortest remaining time scheduling work? | Picks the process with shortest estimated time remaining. If a shorter process is added, the scheduler switches processes.
What are virtual machines? | Any instance where software takes on the function of a machine, including intermediate code or running an OS within another.
What is virtual memory? | An allocated area of secondary storage where pages of inactive jobs are swapped to free up RAM for the current job.
What are applications? | Programs that can be run on a computer, allowing users to carry out specific tasks.
What is an assembler? | A translator in low-level language that converts assembly language into machine code.
What is closed source software? | Proprietary software sold with a licence and restrictions on usage. Source code is not available to users.
What is code generation in compilation? | The third and final stage of compilation, where equivalent machine code is produced.
What is compilation? | The process of analysing high-level language source code and converting it into machine code.
What are compilers? | Translators that convert high-level language to machine code.
What are interpreters? | Translators that check source programs for syntax errors line by line, translate to machine code, and execute each line.
What happens during lexical analysis? | First compilation stage - extra spaces and comments removed, simple errors searched, keywords/constants/variables replaced by tokens, variable names loaded into symbol table.
What are libraries in programming? | Collections of already-compiled programs that can be loaded into a program and run when required.
What are linkers? | Programs that place appropriate machine addresses in call and return instructions, linking all required object code files and modules together.
What are loaders? | Programs that load the executable object program and its associated libraries into memory before running.
What is open source software? | Software whose source code is freely available to view, redistribute or modify.
What is optimisation in code generation? | Making object code as efficient as possible by removing redundancies while producing the same result.
What happens during syntax analysis? | Second compilation stage - statements, expressions and tokens are checked for syntax errors using syntax diagrams.
What is a translator? | A program that converts code from one computer language to another.
What are utilities? | System software with specific maintenance purposes like optimising performance, diagnosing issues, backing up files, setting up firewalls.
What are Agile methodologies? | Iterative process producing incremental prototypes over short sprints. Each prototype is user-tested and feedback/requirement changes are incorporated in future sprints.
What is Extreme Programming? | Type of Agile methodology more responsive to changing user needs with very short development cycles and frequent releases. Checkpoints allow changing or adding requirements.
What is Rapid Application Development (RAD)? | Method with speedy responses to changes through repeated prototyping, continual evaluations, and strict time limits. Users quickly receive reduced-functionality mock-ups.
What is the Spiral Model? | Iterative version of Waterfall model where stages are refined and repeated. First cycle produces initial prototype, successive cycles produce refined prototypes.
What is the Waterfall Lifecycle? | Each development stage completed one at a time in linear order. Results from completed stages input into next. Previous stages can be revisited but following stages must be reworked.
What is assembly language? | Low-level language closely related to but more advanced than machine code. Uses descriptive names and mnemonics for instructions, related to computer design.
What are attributes in OOP? | Data recorded as variables associated with an object.
What are classes in OOP? | Templates defining attributes and methods that can be used to create objects.
What is direct addressing in assembly? | Simplest addressing mode where the operand stores the memory address of the value to be operated on.
What is encapsulation? | Method of maintaining data integrity by only allowing class methods to access data in an object's attributes.
What is immediate addressing in assembly? | Addressing mode where the data in the address field is constant and the operand is the value to be operated on.
What is indexed addressing in assembly? | Addressing mode where the operand address is calculated by adding a constant from the index register to the absolute address in the instruction.
What is indirect addressing in assembly? | Addressing mode where the operand stores the address of the location holding the memory address of the required data.
What is inheritance in OOP? | Concept of subclasses inheriting methods and attributes from their parent class (superclass).
What are methods in OOP? | Program subroutines representing actions an object can perform.
What are object-oriented languages? | Languages where code is made of units called objects (instances of classes). Objects have their own attributes and behaviours and can interact with each other.
What are objects in OOP? | Instances of a class. The behaviour depends on how its attributes were defined.
What is polymorphism? | Objects of different classes can use the same method to perform an action.
What are procedural languages? | High-level languages where statements are grouped into self-contained blocks (functions and procedures). They have built-in data types and structures.
What are programming paradigms? | A style of computation and programming, chosen according to the problem at hand.
