What is applications software? | Software designed to be used by the end-user to perform one specific task. Requires systems software to run.
What is systems software? | Low-level software responsible for running the computer system smoothly, interacting with hardware, and providing a platform for applications software to run.
What are utilities? | System software programs with specific functions linked to the maintenance of the operating system, ensuring consistent, high performance.
What does the compression utility do? | Enables files to be compressed and decompressed, used for transmitting large files across the Internet and compressing scanned files.
What does the disk defragmentation utility do? | Rearranges the contents of the hard drive so files stored in different parts of memory can be accessed faster, improving performance.
What does the automatic updating utility do? | Ensures the operating system is kept up to date, automatically installing updates when the computer is restarted to tackle bugs or security flaws.
What does the backup utility do? | Automatically creates routine copies of specific files selected by the user so files can be recovered in the event of power failure, malicious attack, or other accident.
What is open source software? | Software that can be used by anyone without a license and is distributed with the source code accessible to the public.
What is closed source software? | Software that requires the user to hold an appropriate license to use it. Users cannot access the source code as the company owns the copyright license.
What is an advantage of open source software? | Can be modified and improved by anyone; can be modified and sold on; has technical support from online community.
What is a disadvantage of open source software? | Support available online may be insufficient or incorrect with no user manuals; lower security as may not be developed in a controlled environment.
What is an advantage of closed source software? | Thorough, regular, and well-tested updates; company provides expert support and user manuals; high levels of security as developed professionally.
What is a disadvantage of closed source software? | License restricts how many people can use the software at once; users cannot modify and improve software themselves.
What is a translator? | A program that converts high-level source code into low-level object code, which is then ready to be executed by a computer.
What is a compiler? | A translator that translates high-level code into machine code all at once, after carrying out checks and reporting errors.
What is a key characteristic of compiled code? | It is specific to a particular processor type and operating system. Can be run without a translator being present.
What is an interpreter? | A translator that translates and executes code line-by-line, stopping to produce an error if a line contains an error.
Why are interpreters useful for testing? | They are useful for testing sections of code and pinpointing errors, as time is not wasted compiling the entire program before it has been fully debugged.
What is an assembler? | A translator that translates assembly code into machine code on almost a one-to-one basis.
What is assembly code? | A low-level language that is the 'next level up' from machine code. It is platform specific as instructions depend on the processor's instruction set.
What happens during lexical analysis? | Whitespace and comments are removed from the code. Remaining code is analysed for keywords and names of variables/constants, which are replaced with tokens and stored in a symbol table.
What happens during syntax analysis? | Tokens are analysed against the grammar and rules of the programming language. Tokens that break the rules are flagged as syntax errors and added to a list of errors.
What is an abstract syntax tree? | A representation of the source code in the form of a tree, produced during syntax analysis stage.
What is semantic analysis? | Analysis carried out at the syntax analysis stage where logic mistakes within the program are detected (e.g., multiple declaration, undeclared identifiers).
What happens during code generation? | The abstract syntax tree produced in the syntax analysis stage is used to produce machine code.
What happens during optimisation? | The code is searched for areas it could be made more efficient. Insignificant, redundant parts of code are detected and removed to make the code faster to execute.
What is a danger of optimisation? | Excessive optimisation may alter the way in which the program behaves.
What is a linker? | Software responsible for linking external modules and libraries included within the code.
What is static linking? | Modules and libraries are added directly into the main file. Increases file size but any updates to modules externally will not affect the program.
What is dynamic linking? | Addresses of modules and libraries are included in the file where they are referenced. Files remain small and external updates feed through to the main file.
What is a loader? | A program provided by the operating system that retrieves the library or subroutine from the given memory location when a file is executed.
What are libraries? | Pre-compiled programs which can be incorporated within other programs using static or dynamic linking. They are ready-to-use and error free.
What are advantages of using libraries? | Save time developing and testing modules; can be reused within multiple programs; save programmers from having to 'reinvent the wheel'.
Give an example of a syntax error. | Undeclared variable type or incomplete set of brackets.
Give an example of a semantic error. | Multiple declaration or undeclared identifiers.
What is parsing? | The process used to check each line of code is well-formed during syntax analysis.
Is machine code the same as object code? | Yes, machine code is the same as object code.
What is high-level code? | Code that is written and understood by the programmer but not the computer. Low-level code can be executed by a computer but cannot be directly understood.
